The longer you live,
the more you realize that acquiring wisdom
is a lifelong process
—really, a daily one.
But let’s just analyze the process
of acquiring wisdom.
The basis for wisdom is knowledge,
so the first step is to acquire knowledge.
But wisdom
isn’t just knowing a lot of things.
Our Insight  book
under the subject “Knowledge” says this:
“Wisdom is the ability
to put knowledge to work, or to use it,
“the intelligent application of learning.
“A person might have considerable knowledge
“but not know how to use it
“because of lacking wisdom.
“Jesus linked wisdom with accomplishment
“in saying: ‘Wisdom is proved righteous
by its works.’”
To illustrate, someone once said,
“Knowledge without wisdom
“is like having flour, eggs,
“butter, milk, and sugar
but not knowing
how to put it all together to make a cake.”
So we might say
that in God’s Word,
we have all the ingredients
—all the principles are there for wisdom.
We have to know
how to put those principles together
—make the cake; the recipe is there.
Now, sometimes in recipes
(most of the time, really),
they list all the ingredients and sometimes
even step-by-step procedures to make a cake.
You might think, ‘Well, I wish I could see
‘an expert cook or baker
actually put those ingredients together.’
Well, interestingly today, on the Internet,
you have these videos
with experts doing just that.
Well, in a way, that is what Jehovah
has done for us
because in the Bible,
we have not just principles
but we have accounts of people
putting those principles to work
in their life.
They’re showing us how to make the cake,
as it were.
Now, let’s take an example
of a married couple
who might use accounts from the Bible
to help them
see principles being put to work
—examples that will help them
resolve a problem
that will preserve their peace and unity.
And I must add this disclaimer:
If the persons described in this scenario
resemble anyone you know,
it is plainly coincidental, as they say.
Now, here’s a wife, and she wants
to raise an issue with her husband.
What’s the problem?
She feels stressed out.
Both of them work every day
at their theocratic assignments.
The husband is very hospitable,
and he likes
to invite people over for a meal.
Well, that’s nice.
She likes that too.
The problem is that she ends up
doing all the work
—making the menu, preparing the meal,
cleaning up afterward.
She’s stressed.
Now, she knows the principle
at Ecclesiastes 3:7
that there is “a time to keep quiet
and a time to speak.”
Now, can she find an example in the Bible
of a wife who put that principle to work?
Ah, she thinks of Esther.
Remember Esther—Queen Esther.
In Esther chapter 5,
she had a very delicate problem to discuss
with her husband, the king,
and she likely knew this principle
about “a time to speak.”
How did she put that to work?
Well, she created a suitable setting
to reveal what was in her heart.
She invited him
to specially prepared banquets
with things she knew he would like,
including wine.
And when he was in a good mood,
she presented the problem
at the right moment, and she had success.
So having that example in mind, the wise wife
will choose a time or create a setting
when her husband is relaxed
and she can speak respectfully
about the situation.
Now, what about the Christian husband
in this scenario?
Now, he knows the principle
at 1 Peter 3:7:
“You husbands, in the same way,
“continue dwelling with them
according to knowledge.
Assign them honor as to a weaker vessel,
the feminine one.”
So he knows the principle
to know your wife’s limitations
—treat her considerately.
Now, can you find a Bible example
of a wise husband
who put that principle to work
in a practical way?
Well, let’s take a brief glance
in Genesis chapter 18.
We’re not going to read all of these verses,
but in verses 1-8,
here’s the scenario.
Three important visitors
show up unexpectedly at the tent of Abraham.
He invites them for a meal
—he says for just “a piece of bread.”
Well, did he leave it to Sarah
to figure out the menu?
No, he arranges for an elaborate meal
consisting of freshly baked bread,
butter, milk, and choice tender meat.
Did he leave it to Sarah
to do all the work?
Well, he did ask her to prepare the bread.
But Abraham was personally involved
in all the preparations,
even setting the table with the food
and acting as a waiter.
So after reviewing that account,
the husband sees the wisdom
of helping his wife
with the work involved in hosting guests,
including cleaning up afterward.
Now, this husband
who knows his wife is overly stressed
might think of the principle too
at Ephesians 5:25:
“Husbands, continue loving your wives,
“just as the Christ
also loved the congregation.”
Well, how did Christ love the congregation?
How did he put that principle of love to work
with the disciples?
Here’s one example.
If you look at Matthew 15:21,
we read there: “Leaving there
“[that is, probably Capernaum],
Jesus now went into the region
of Tyre and Sidon.”
So you may think to yourself:
‘Why is the Lord
‘going outside the boundaries,
or the borders, of Israel
‘into Gentile territory?
He was assigned to Israel.’
The cross-reference you’ll see is Mark 7:24,
and it adds this:
“He rose up from there
“and went into the region of Tyre and Sidon.
“There he entered into a house
“and did not want anyone to know it,
but he could not escape notice.”
Now, that seems
a little mysterious perhaps, at first.
Why does the Lord not want anyone to know
where he was with the apostles?
The Watchtower  has commented
that when comparing this account
with Mark 6:30, 31,
we see that not very long before
Jesus had told the apostles
that they should find
an isolated place and rest up a little.
Well, it never worked out
because wherever Jesus went,
the crowds followed him.
So by going into Phoenicia
(outside the borders of Israel),
not letting anyone else know
where he was going,
and taking the apostles with him,
they could get some much-needed rest.
So we see how Jesus
put the principle of love to work
in the way he treated his disciples.
Wise husbands will do the same.
And there are times,
really, during our busy lives
when we too, and especially our dear wives,
need to rest up a little.
Even during this pandemic
when travel is limited,
well, let’s try to find a way
—some time away from our normal routine
so the two of you can rest up a little.
So in summary, as we go through our lives,
let’s go on acquiring wisdom.
And as we acquire knowledge of God’s Word
and see how others
put that knowledge to work,
we can act wisely.